---
layout: post.njk
date: 2019-09-03
image: /img/reformulacion.jpg
title: Reformulation of charges in Ola Bini's case. The irregularities continue
tags:
  - recommendeden
  - post
  - en
---
Ola Bini, free software activist, human rights defender and expert in digital
security, is subject to a judicial process in Ecuador since April 2019. So far,
a large set of organizations around the world have denounced that there is a
political motivation in the accusation and that the case is marked by serious
violations of due process.<sup>1</sup>

With that background, various organizations from the civil society of Ecuador
and international ones made the decision of witnessing the hearing of the
reformulation of charges that took place last Thursday, August 29. In it, the
Prosecutor's Office requested that Ola Bini should be accused of non-consensual
access to a computer system (Art. No. 234 of the Integral Criminal Code of
Ecuador), discarding the original accusation: attacking the integrity of such
systems (Art. No. 232 of the Integral Criminal Code of Ecuador). The central
evidence presented to justify this change was a photograph from 2015 that allegedly
prove Bini's non-consensual access into the National Telecommunications
Corporation (CNT) system.

It is necessary to highlight that this hearing was held two days before the end
of the fiscal instruction period, which legally cannot last more than 120 days
(Art. No. 592 of the Integral Criminal Code of Ecuador). However, the law
provides that after a reformulation of charges, all investigations periods must
be increased by 30 days (Art. No. 596 of the Integral Criminal Code of Ecuador).
Using as a subterfuge that the object of the crime and the penalty for the new
charges are similar to the originals (distinction that the law does not make),
the extension did not take place. As a result, Bini did not have the extra 30
days to defend himself against this new accusation, but rather 2, which
constitutes a violation of his right to defense. In this regard, the
Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador in its Article 76, Number 7, subsection
“b” establishes that every person prosecuted must “have the time and adequate
means to prepare his defense”. This violation of due process also violates
International Treaties and Agreements signed and ratified by Ecuador and
applicable jurisprudence, such as the Fermín Ramírez <i>vs</i> Guatemala case.

The Prosecutor's Office argued that the photo submitted would prove the
non-consensual access from Bini to the CNT computer system. However, there are
two issues regarding that that attract attention. First, that such a photograph
would have been leaked to the press before being included in the file and that
the defense did not have access to it.<sup>2</sup> Second, that that photo,
according to the <i> Electronic Frontier Foundation </i> (EFF), does not show
neither a violation nor an unauthorized access to a private server.<sup>3</sup>
However, during the hearing it was evidenced the technical ignorance from the
Prosecution and the responsible judge of the case that allowed the
reformulation.

Finally, we are worried that Bini was originally deprived of his freedom for 70
days based on public statements made by the current Minister of Government,
María Paula Romo, and by the President, Lenín Moreno. According to the
authorities, Bini was part of a supposed conspiracy from Wikileaks to
destabilize the government, carried out by Russian hackers residing in Ecuador.
This reformulation of charges denies these accusations -questioned by
Amnesty International, as well-, confirming that we are facing a case of political
nature policy and vitiated by multiple violations of due process.<sup>4</sup>

We will remain vigilant of this case, and we will continue to articulate efforts
so that justice is made and Ola Bini will have a trial according to standards
of due process and where he can fully exercise all his rights.

<center>
<b>Asociación para el Progreso de las Comunicaciones (APC)</b>

<b>Asociación de Software Libre del Ecuador (ASLE)</b>

<b>Comité Permanente por la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos (CDH)</b>

<b>Derechos Digitales</b>

<b>Indymedia Ecuador</b>

<b>Fundación Regional de Asesoría en Derechos Humanos (INREDH)</b>

<b>Internet Bolivia</b>

<b>Project on Organizing, Development, Education and Research (PODER)</b>

<b>Tecnología y Comunidad (TEDIC)</b>
</center>

<hr>
<sup>1</sup> See: https://freeolabini.org/es/statement_2/

<sup>2</sup> See: https://4pelagatos.com/2019/08/15/ola-bini-cae-con-todo-y-escaparate/

<sup>3</sup> For a more detailed description of the photo in question and its content, see: https://www.eff.org/es/deeplinks/2019/08/telnet-not-crime-unconvincing-prosecution-screenshot-leaked-ola-bini-case

<sup>4</sup> See: https://www.amnesty.org/es/latest/news/2019/08/ecuador-gobierno-interfiere-en-proceso-penal-contra-ola-bini/
