---
layout: post.njk
date: 2019-05-02
image: /img/ola_letter_2.jpg
title: Kial Ekvadoro?
tags:
  - lettereo
  - post
  - eo
---
Two weeks. Prison here in Ecuador is a maddening mix of long stretches of
isolation and boredom interspersed with random threats and acts of violence.
Today was a break in the structure: visitation day.

You can receive max 2 visitors for 3 hours. Two of my best friends here in
Ecuador visited. It’s always great to see friends; the isolation here is
probably the hardest aspect. But after visits, I always end up feeling empty,
pensive and moody. My friends brought up the question I want to write about
today. Simply, why am I in Ecuador? And my recent experiences, have they changed
my perspectives?

I’m sure a lot of people assume I’m angry at Ecuador, that I will want to leave
as soon as I get out and never come back, but no, nothing could be further from
the truth. I love Ecuador. I love living here. I have my life here and if I’m
allowed, I would like to continue my life.

Obviously, I’m not happy at being in my current position, but I can’t blame the
whole country for that. Instead, I do blame certain specific individuals who are
instrumentalizing my friendship with Julian Assange and making me a political
pawn without any trace of wrongdoing. Yes, I’m angry at these people and so
Ecuadorians be. Using – and abusing – the laws of the country in this way should
not be acceptable. But this is being done by a few individuals, not the whole
population.

To be sure, the penal system of Ecuador has to be reformed. The plight of my
many fellow inmates is evidence of this; they mostly live in significantly worse
conditions than mine.

Ecuador is not perfect. There are many things that could be improved. Just like
the rest of Latin America, Ecuador has several hundreds of years of colonial
history to deal with, followed by many years of military dictatorships, general
unrest and repeated unlawful interventions by so called developed countries.

So no, Ecuador can improve on many things, but from the historical perspective,
the peoples of Latin America have shown tremendous strength in getting as far as
they have.

So, coming back to the original question: Why did I come here?

For many reasons, and sometimes they are hard to tease but some are very
mundane. I really like the people here. People are warm, open, caring and they
care about the community. This attracted me a lot. And I can say that even in
my current situation, this perspective on the people remain. From how my fellow
inmates have taken care of me, to how people on the street have come up to my
parents on the street, expressing their support. My faith in the Ecuadorian
people remains strong.

I like that politics is something that people care about here. It’s in the blood
of people. That’s something I appreciated from the beginning. People in Ecuador
talk about open source and understand the political value of technology.

And there are talented people here. When we started my organization in
Ecuador, we quickly found a team of people with lots of potential, diligence and
drive. Honestly, I’m dying to get back to work with them and continue doing good
for the world.

Ecuador is not a paradise. It’s a complex, multicultural, sometimes strange
place with all kinds of people with different worldviews, dealing with 500 years
of complicated history. Let’s not forget that and reduce the country and its
people to a caricature – good or bad -.

I’m glad to be here and hopefully I have along future ahead of me in Ecuador,
hopefully outside of prison!
